Nick Clegg: pupil premium will help future generations escape
shadow of the deficit

Policy to help disadvantaged children should give Lib Dem
leader some political respite after tuition fees controversy

A range of measures designed to increase fairness, including a
pupil premium for a million disadvantaged children, are
crucial to ensure future generations are not disadvantaged by
the "shadow of the deficit", Nick Clegg said today.

The deputy prime minister will this morning announce a
"fairness premium" worth £7bn, likely to be one of the few
pieces of new spending in next week's spending
review. Delivery of the pupil premium, one of his party's
central manifesto promises, will give Clegg some badly needed
political respite after he was forced earlier this week to
tear up his party's manifesto commitment to abolish university
tuition fees, and instead to back proposals to allow them to
at least double.

The pupil premium policy was also in the Tory manifesto.

"What we are saying and what I will be explaining today is
that the priority we attach to giving children from
disadvantaged backgrounds the chances to get ahead, to live
out the dreams, to pursue their aspirations, is absolutely
crucial," Clegg told BBC Radio 4's Today programme. "We need
to make sure the shadow of this deficit doesn't blight the
life chances of the future."

Clegg expressed regret that the coalition government was
raising tuition fees. Although the impact will be to increase
the indebtedness of students, he said raising fees was an
attempt to avoid saddling future generations with the burden
of the national deficit.

"Do I regret that the policy that we went into the general
election on tuition fees is something we have found we cannot
deliver, and that the alternative, for instance, of a pure
graduate tax that we explored very actively for months and
months, don't actually work and are in themselves even
unfairer? Yes, of course I regret that," he said.

"We have to deal with this because if we don't we are simply
blighting the life chances of future generations. That is why
these difficult decisions on university education, and these
very progressive decisions on targeting help on children when
they are younger when it really makes a difference to their
subsequent life chances is so important to me."

Clegg is claiming the package represented the Liberal
Democrats' red line in the spending negotiations.

The £7bn fairness package, drawn up in lengthy negotiations
with the Treasury, will have three main elements:

All disadvantaged two-year-olds will have an entitlement to 15
hours a week of pre-school education, in addition to the 15
hours already available to those aged three and four. The cash
will go to the poorest 20% of children.

A pupil premium to help poorer pupils wherever they live in
the country. Schools will receive additional funds to offer
targeted help to every pupil eligible for free school meals
and reduce educational inequalities. The vast bulk of the £7bn
fairness premium – roughly £5bn – will be devoted to the pupil
premium. Schools will be entitled to spend the money as they
see fit, for instance on catch-up classes for struggling
pupils. Currently, funding is directed towards areas of
disadvantage but is spread out evenly across the schools in
that area.

A form of student premium designed to remove barriers to poor
children going to university, over and above bursaries already
in existence. "We must make sure that bright but poor children
grow up believing that a university education is not out of
reach," Clegg will say today.

This higher education element of the package will be spent on
either improved maintenance grants or free tuition years.

Graham Allen, the Labour MP chairing a commission into early
intervention with children from deprived backgrounds, was
lavish in his praise for the initiative.

"I think this is a superb investment in early intervention
which will repay itself to the taxpayer many times over
provided the children learn social and emotional capabilities
which middle-class two-year-olds take for granted," he said.

But Chris Keates, general secretary of the NASUWT, the largest
teaching union, said the investment would "sink without trace
in the gaping hole in the education budget left by the deep
cuts predicted in the comprehensive spending review".

"This announcement is nothing to do with fairness," he
said. "It is nothing to do with tackling disadvantage. It is
nothing to do with raising educational standards. It's a sop
to Liberal Democrat backbenchers who at long last may be
showing signs of rebelling as one totemic Liberal Democrat
education policy after another is sacrificed to Tory
ideology."

Government sources did not disclose last night the source of
the funding for the fairness premium, saying this will await
the spending review on Wednesday, but some of the funding
inevitably will come from cuts in other parts of the wider
education budget.
