
JERUSALEM (CNN) -- Gunbattles in the Jenin refugee camp Friday morning
left six Palestinians dead as Israeli troops searched the camp for
gunmen and terror suspects, the Israeli military said. Palestinian
sources put the number of dead at five.

According to the Israel Defense Forces, its troops came under fire as
they entered the West Bank camp. Two Palestinian gunmen were killed at
a house the Israeli forces planned to search. Four other Palestinians
armed with machine guns -- were killed inside the house, following a
shootout, IDF said.

Palestinian sources said Israeli tank, infantry and helicopters
entered the Jenin refugee camp Friday morning. The forces went to a
house where four Islamic Jihad activists were staying. One Palestinian
from the Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade was killed by helicopter fire near
the house and the four Islamic Jihad who were inside the house were
killed after heavy gunfire, the sources said.

Saeb Erakat, the chief Palestinian negotiator, condemned the latest
Israeli moves and called on the international community to intervene
and stop the cycle of violence.

Israeli officials have said their aim is to root out the "terrorist
infrastructure" in Gaza and the West Bank.

The latest violence was the continuation of a bloody 24-hour period in
the West Bank.

Israeli soldiers Thursday shot and killed five Palestinians armed with
rifles and explosives in the West Bank town of Tamun north of Nablus,
IDF and Palestinian security sources said.

IDF forces encountered massive gunfire fired by Palestinian gunmen,"
an IDF statement said. "The IDF force returned fire and killed five
gunmen, all Hamas operatives. On their bodies, the force found two
M-16 rifles, pistols, an explosives belt, grenades and ammunition."

Separately, 11 Palestinians were arrested early Friday in the city of
Hebron by Israeli troops.

In Gaza, two armed Palestinians were arrested by Israeli forces near
the Kissufim crossing and another two Palestinians were arrested in
Rafah.

