UNIVERSITIES TO BE PAID TO TAKE POOR STUDENTS

Universities could be paid to take more students from poor backgrounds
under a £7 billion Coalition plan to improve social mobility.
 
Graeme Paton and James Kirkup
Published: 7:00AM BST 15 Oct 2010
19 Comments

Nick Clegg, the Deputy Prime Minister, will announce on Friday
the creation of a "fairness premium" designed to give deprived
children access to the best education.  But he will face
questions as to how, at a time of vast cuts in public
spending, the investment will be paid for.
 
He is also likely to face accusations of "social engineering",
particularly from private school leaders who fear that
middle-class pupils will be overlooked in the race for places
at top universities. The move will also be seen as an attempt
to divert attention from a Liberal Democrat split over student
tuition fees.

Earlier this week, Vince Cable, the Business Secretary,
outraged Lib Dem backbenchers by endorsing Lord Browne of
Madingley's review of higher education, which recommended a
sharp rise in the cost of a degree.

He suggested that student fees could more than double to
£7,000 as part of a radical plan to cut almost all direct
state funding for undergraduate courses.

Two former Lib Dem leaders, Sir Menzies Campbell and Charles
Kennedy, have pledged to vote against the fee rise when the
proposals are put before Parliament. Today Mr Clegg will
attempt to draw a line under the row by announcing the
creation of an "investment package" designed to give the
poorest children a "better start in life".

The premium – a Conservative and Lib Dem election pledge – was
originally designed to give primary and secondary schools
extra money to take in more of the poorest pupils. Deprived
children would also be entitled to more pre-school
education. The move would benefit up to a million children
whose families earn less than £16,000 a year.

In a radical extension of the policy, Mr Clegg will announce
that the financial package would also fund university
education. It was unclear whether the extra money would be
handed to the students themselves in the form of improved
grants or passed directly to universities as an incentive to
admit more students from deprived backgrounds.

In a speech today at a school in Chesterfield, Mr Clegg will
say: "We must make sure that bright but poor children grow up
believing that a university education is not out of reach. "So
we are looking now at what can be done to remove the obstacles
to aspiration that hold back bright boys and girls from
deprived backgrounds. Their passage must not be blocked."

